essays/reflection.md, before:

---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Reflection on Software Engineering"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2025-08-11
published: True
labels:
  - Reflection
  - Software Engineering
  - Essays
---
<img width="200px" class="rounded float-start pe-4" src="../img/difficulty/AI.jpg">

# Reflection on Software Engineering

  Coming into this class, I honestly thought it was just going to be about making web apps. I figured we'd learn some frameworks, build a few projects, and that would be it. But pretty quickly I realized the bigger goal was to understand how software gets built in a way that's organized, sustainable, and works well when you have more than just one person coding. The web development part was just the toolset. We were really learning the foundations of software engineering that can be used anywhere.

  One of the first big takeaways for me was configuration management. Before this class, I knew Git existed, but I mostly used it as a way to upload code to GitHub without really thinking about version control as a discipline. Now I see it's way more than that, it's about keeping track of every change, understanding who did what and why, and making sure nothing gets lost in the shuffle. When we worked on group projects, branching and merging kept us from stepping on each other's toes. I can see how this would be crucial outside of web development too. If I were working on a research project that used complex simulations, keeping track of different versions of the code and data would be the difference between getting accurate results and wasting weeks on bad runs.
  
  Another big concept for me was Agile Project Management, specifically the version we used called Issue Driven Project Management (IDPM). At first, the idea of breaking everything into "issues" and tracking them in a project board felt like extra work. But once I got used to it, it made things so much easier to manage. It forced me to think in smaller steps instead of just staring at this huge list of things I knew had to get done "sometime." I also liked how IDPM made it obvious when we were making progress, closing an issue felt like a mini victory. I could definitely see myself using this for non-coding projects too, like organizing an event or managing a video production schedule. It's basically a way to keep things moving forward without getting overwhelmed.
  
  Lastly, design patterns really clicked for me this semester. At first, they seemed kind of abstract like, why not just write the code that works and move on? But the more examples we saw, the more I realized that patterns are about building things in a way that can be reused and understood by other developers. We used the Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern a lot, which kept the data, logic, and UI separate. I can see how the same thinking would apply in, say, building an app for a sensor network, keeping the data processing separate from the visualization makes it easier to change one without breaking the other.
  
  Looking back, I think what I learned in this class will stick with me long after the details of the web stack fade. Configuration management taught me how to work with others without creating chaos. Agile and IDPM taught me how to stay organized and make steady progress. Design patterns taught me how to think about code as part of a bigger system, not just a one-off solution. These aren't just web development skills, they're skills I'll be able to carry into whatever kind of software (or even non-software) projects I take on in the future.

Commit message:

Revise reflection essay title and enhance content
Updated the title and date of the reflection essay, and restructured the content for clarity and depth.

essays/reflection.md, after:

---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Building Software That Lasts Lessons Beyond the Code"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2026-01-21
published: True
labels:
  - Reflection
  - Software Engineering
  - Essays
---
<img width="200px" class="rounded float-start pe-4" src="../img/difficulty/AI.jpeg">

# Building Software That Lasts Lessons Beyond the Code


## Discovering the Bigger Picture

When I first started this class I assumed software engineering was mostly about building web apps. I thought we would learn a few frameworks, complete some projects, and call it a day. But very quickly I realized that the course was teaching something much deeper: how software is built in a way that is organized, maintainable, and scalable especially when more than one person is involved. The web development exercises were simply the toolset. The real goal was understanding the foundations of software engineering that apply to any programming domain.

## Mastering Configuration Management

One of my first major takeaways was configuration management. Before this class I had only a basic understanding of Git and mostly used it to upload code to GitHub. Now I understand that version control is about more than storage. It is about tracking changes, understanding who made them, and preserving the integrity of a project. During group projects, branching and merging ensured we did not overwrite each other’s work. I can see how these skills would apply to complex simulations or research projects, where keeping track of versions could be the difference between accurate results and wasted time.

## Agile Project Management in Practice

Another lesson that reshaped my approach to work was Agile Project Management, specifically Issue Driven Project Management IDPM. Initially, breaking work into issues on a project board felt tedious, but it quickly became clear how much it improved organization and focus. Tackling tasks in smaller, manageable steps made progress more visible and measurable. Closing each issue provided a tangible sense of accomplishment, and I can imagine using this method for non software projects as well, like planning events or coordinating creative productions. Agile principles are ultimately about keeping projects moving without getting overwhelmed.

## Thinking in Patterns

Finally, design patterns fundamentally changed the way I think about writing code. At first, patterns seemed abstract. Why not just write code that works? Over time, I realized patterns like Model View Controller MVC help create systems that are reusable and understandable. Separating data, logic, and presentation is not just about neatness. It allows other developers and future me to modify parts of the system without breaking the rest. I can see this approach being useful for building anything from web apps to sensor network applications, where separation of concerns keeps systems flexible and maintainable.

## Looking Ahead

Looking back, the lessons from this class will outlast the specifics of the web stack. Configuration management taught me collaboration without chaos, Agile taught me how to stay organized and maintain steady progress, and design patterns taught me to see code as part of a larger system. These are transferable skills that I will carry into future software projects and beyond, ensuring that the work I build is not only functional but sustainable.
